Learning-Based On-Track System Identification for
Scaled Autonomous Racing in Under a Minute

arXiv:2411.17508v1 [cs.RO] 26 Nov 2024

Onur Dikici∗ , Edoardo Ghignone† , Cheng Hu‡ , Nicolas Baumann† ,
Lei Xie‡ , Andrea Carron† , Michele Magno† , and Matteo Corno∗

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the learning-based on-track system identification method for autonomous racing. The
nominal vehicle model is corrected using a residual Neural Network (NN) error model, trained on data collected during
on-track, real-world driving. Pacejka parameters are iteratively updated to enhance the overall accuracy of the vehicle model.
Abstract—Accurate tire modeling is crucial for optimizing
autonomous racing vehicles, as State-of-the-Art (SotA) modelbased techniques rely on precise knowledge of the vehicle’s parameters, yet system identification in dynamic racing conditions is
challenging due to varying track and tire conditions. Traditional
methods require extensive operational ranges, often impractical
in racing scenarios. Machine Learning (ML)-based methods,
while improving performance, struggle with generalization and
depend on accurate initialization. This paper introduces a novel
on-track system identification algorithm, incorporating a NN for
error correction, which is then employed for traditional system
identification with virtually generated data. Crucially, the process
is iteratively reapplied, with tire parameters updated at each
cycle, leading to notable improvements in accuracy in tests on a
scaled vehicle. Experiments show that it is possible to learn a tire
model without prior knowledge with only 30 seconds of driving
data, and 3 seconds of training time. This method demonstrates
greater one-step prediction accuracy than the baseline Nonlinear
Least Squares (NLS) method under noisy conditions, achieving
a 3.3x lower Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and yields tire
models with comparable accuracy to traditional steady-state
system identification. Furthermore, unlike steady-state methods
requiring large spaces and specific experimental setups, the
proposed approach identifies tire parameters directly on a race
track in dynamic racing environments.
Index Terms—Field Robots, Wheeled Robots, Machine Learning for Robot Control
∗ Onur Dikici and Matteo Corno are associated with the Dipartimento di
Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
† Edoardo Ghignone, Nicolas Baumann, Andrea Carron, and Michele
Magno are associated with ETH Zürich.
‡ Cheng Hu and Lei Xie are associated with the Department of Control
Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University.
Onur Dikici, Edoardo Ghignone contributed equally to this work. (Corresponding author: Onur Dikici.)

I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous racing offers a dynamic, high-speed environment that requires high performance under extreme conditions,
making it ideal for testing the limits of Autonomous Driving
Systems (ADS) in scenarios similar to potential edge cases in
real-world driving [1]. It provides a controlled yet demanding
setting for advancing autonomous driving technologies without
risking public traffic safety [2]. The challenging nature
of racing drives the development of advanced data-driven
algorithms that perform reliably at high speeds and handle
complex dynamics, such as operating at the edge of friction.
Additionally, racing supplies measurable metrics like lap
time and tracking error to evaluate the performance of an
ADS, addressing the difficulties of quantifying performance
in general autonomous driving [2].
A primary challenge in autonomous racing is to complete
a racetrack at high speeds [1, 2], which poses a demanding
task for autonomous control systems due to the highly nonlinear behavior of the car, when tire dynamics exceed the
linear operating range and the vehicle must operate at the
edge of traction [3–6]. Thus, accurately tracking trajectories
at cornering speeds that saturate tire friction capacity is a
central and highly challenging control task in autonomous
racing [2, 7, 8].
To achieve said level of high performance, model-based
controllers must utilize knowledge of vehicle model dynamics
to compute effective control signals [4, 9]. These types of
controllers require prior knowledge of tire dynamics, which
are notoriously difficult to estimate in field conditions [4].
Thus, accurate system identification of the entire model, with

a particular focus on the complex tire dynamics, is essential
for enabling high-performance model-based controllers [6].
Typically, this type of system identification is performed
prior to a race through meticulous tire characterization
experiments. These experiments are time-consuming and
require a large, open space with a surface similar to the actual
racetrack [4, 10, 11]. Enabling model-based controllers in realworld racing requires accurate tire parameter identification and
robustness to variables like surface traction changes. System
identification must be simple and deployable without large
open spaces, which are often unavailable before a race [1].
Autonomous driving literature has identified two primary types
of system identification methods:
I Off-Track Identification: These methods require steadystate conditions. They are accurate because system
identification is conducted through steady-state experiments, providing a simplified dynamics environment
with ideal conditions [4, 10–12]. Additionally, because
the vehicle is in a steady-state, there is no need to
deal with differentiating noisy measurements. However,
they necessitate large, open spaces similar to the actual
racetrack surface, which may not always be available,
especially given the variable conditions within the nature
of racing.
II On-Track Identification: These methods do not require
large spaces for steady-state conditions but are more
challenging due to the vehicle not being in a steady-state.
Optimization methods, such as NLS [13, 14], are used to
perform this type of identification but can be brittle and
fail to produce reasonable results in practice. Different
optimization methods can then successfully produce
estimates, such as the non-convex program presented
in [15] or the method in [16], which needs a good initial
estimate of the tire parameters.
To address the limitations of previous system identification
methods, this paper proposes a novel learning-based on-track
system identification method. This method not only improves
the accuracy of parameter identification but also significantly
enhances the operational simplicity of tire parameter characterizations. It eliminates the need for space- and time-consuming
identification maneuvers and overcomes the brittleness of
conventional NLS-based on-track identification methods by
leveraging the efficiency of data-driven NN learning. The
contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
I On-Track Identification: The proposed method identifies tire characteristics directly on the track, eliminating the need for steady-state identification experiments
in large open spaces [10]. This approach allows the
identification process to be conducted on the actual
track being used, removing the logistical challenges of
finding a similar surface prior to the race and providing
high operational simplicity. Furthermore, thanks to the
combined method, the typical overfitting problem of ML
techniques is avoided, as tire parameters are eventually
obtained from our technique.
II Robustness: Our combined method using a NN-based
learning scheme with traditional system identification
demonstrates high robustness to noise encountered in

real-life deployments. Compared to NLS-based on-track
identification methods, our approach achieves up to
3.3 times greater accuracy under noisy conditions in
simulation and handles the noise experienced in realworld robotic systems, whereas conventional methods
often fail to identify parameters outside of simulation
environments.
III Open-Source: The proposed identification method is
fully integrated into an open-source full-stack implementation [1], enhancing reproducibility and extensibility. Code available at: https://github.com/ForzaETH/
On-Track-SysID.
II. RELATED WORK
In system identification for autonomous vehicles, steadystate techniques like [10, 11] face limitations due to their
requirement for large free areas for circular motion. The
work presented in [11] uses high-fidelity simulators and
high-quality initial estimates, while other approaches rely
on provided ground truth tire data to learn [12]. On-track
methods [6, 14–17], which utilize data collected during driving
along the same track destined for a competition, present a
more practical alternative. Among these methods, classical
approaches like NLS are some of the suggested ones [13], and
they are implemented online for instance in [14]. However,
these methods could be sensitive to noisy data, and [17]
shows that simple data-driven techniques can outperform
least-squares-based system identification on real data.
Different approaches employed Gaussian Processs (GPs)
for efficiently exploiting real data, such as [18], where a
kinematic model is extended with a GP and iteratively updates
to learn model mismatch in simulation, or [19] where the
authors present a method to utilize an ensemble of GPs
to be able to model varying friction. Both these models
however suffer from computational limitations, especially
with the need to continuously update the models, and, to
mitigate computational costs, different works utilize sparse GP
regression, such as [16, 20]. Despite these improvements, their
methods remain untested under significant model mismatches,
as they often start with an initially accurate physical model.
Furthermore, NN techniques have been proposed to address
the computational cost, such as in [21] where an Extreme
Learning Machine (ELM) is used to successfully identify
dynamic vehicle models in simulation, or in [22] where an
end-to-end NN is proposed for learning vehicle dynamics.
This last work, however, highlights how these ML techniques
can fail to generalize across diverse conditions and would
require extensive data gathering to be deployed in online
applications. Recent work explored the adaptability with ML
models more extensively, such as with Continual-MAML
[23], or with different architectures such as LSTMs [24] or
Transformers [25].
This work builds on top of this last direction, aiming to
exploit the efficiency in data processing of NNs and to address
two main issues with the hybrid architecture joining ML
and traditional system identification. Firstly, we show how
our method can be more practical than end-to-end learning
techniques [21, 22] and steady-state system identification

procedures [10, 11] by learning with less than a minute
of training data and not requiring the design of specific
experiments or significantly large spaces. Furthermore, we
address the need for adaptable models, already highlighted
by [14, 19], by presenting a lightweight model that can adapt
to new data in at most 3 seconds of training time, effectively
enabling online adaptation on a fully onboard setup. Crucially,
our method differs from adaptive ML techniques for learning
dynamic models [23–25] in a key way: rather than only
updating the NN, our approach iteratively updates both the
tire model and the NN. Jointly updating both models allows for
accurate dynamic representation even with a relatively simple
model comprising less than 60 parameters. Furthermore, it also
paves the way for future work intersecting novel techniques
[23–25] and traditional empirical methods such as the Pacejka
tire model.

Y
X

Figure 2: Dynamic single-track model showing lateral forces
(Fyf , Fyr ), slip angles (αf , αr ), velocities (vx , vy ), steering
In this section, we provide an overview of our methodology, angle (δ), yaw rate (ω), angle with respect to the positive
which proposes a NN model to capture the model mismatch. X axis (ψ), and X-Y coordinate system. The symbols lr , lf
Although modeling the mismatch with a data-driven approach indicate, respectively, the distance from the center of gravity
may fail to represent out-of-distribution data, simulating and to the rear and front axle, and L indicates the full wheelbase
generating predictions with in-distribution data enables the length. Note: This image is illustrative; slip angles are
extraction of the underlying Pacejka parameters embedded exaggerated for visualization purposes.
within the combined NN and vehicle model. Furthermore, this
process is done iteratively to gradually improve the accuracy
transfers are neglected. The slip angles are also computed as
of the identified tire model with each iteration.
follows:


vy + lf ω
αf = δ − arctan
A. Vehicle Model
vx

.
(3)
The vehicle model used in this work illustrated in Figure 2,
vy − lr ω
α
=
−
arctan
r
is the dynamic single-track model, a commonly used vehicle
vx
model in the field of autonomous racing as it effectively
This work focuses solely on lateral vehicle dynamics,
models tire-road interactions in steady-state conditions [26].
specifically the identification of Pacejka model parameters
This model simplifies the vehicle to one wheel per axis
Φp = [Bf , Cf , Df , Ef , Br , Cr , Dr , Er ]. Accordingly, we
and decouples longitudinal and lateral dynamics. While this
treat x = [vy , ω] as states, and u = [vx , δ] as inputs. Using
approach captures the essential vehicle behavior, it relies
Euler integration, the discrete-time vehicle model becomes:
on a steady-state tire model that may not fully account for
1
the dynamic response of tires during rapid maneuvers. The
vy,k+1 = vy,k +
(Fyr + Fyf cos δ − mvx ω) Ts
vehicle is considered to be a rigid body with a mass m and
m
(4)
1
an inertia Iz around the z-axis of the center of gravity. lf and
ωk+1 = ωk +
(Fyf lf cos δ − Fyr lr ) Ts ,
Iz
lr represent the distance of the front and rear axle from the
center of gravity, respectively.
where Ts is the sampling time.
The equation of motion for the lateral model can be
B. Model Mismatch Problem
expressed as follows:
There are instances when the identified Pacejka parameters
1
v̇y =
(Fyr + Fyf cos δ − mvx ω)
Φp may no longer be accurate. This can result from changes
m
(1) in the racing surface—as Pacejka parameters are surface1
ω̇ =
(Fyf lf cos δ − Fyr lr ) .
dependent—as well as from tire wear and variations in tire
Iz
temperature. Consequently, there may be a discrepancy beTo accurately model the lateral forces Fyf and Fyr , the tween the predicted subsequent states x̂k+1 and the measured
Pacejka Magic Formula [3] is used in its general form
subsequent states xk+1 . This discrepancy is known as model
mismatch and is expressed as follows:
Fyi = Di sin(Ci arctan(Bi αi − Ei (Bi αi − arctan(Bi αi )))).
(2)
ek = xk+1 − x̂k+1 ,
(5)
where i is an element of {f, r}, representing the front and
rear tires respectively. Due to the low center of gravity of where x̂k+1 = [v̂y,k+1 , ω̂k+1 ] is calculated using (4) with the
the scaled car used in this work, longitudinal and lateral load nominal Pacejka parameters Φp .
III. SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION

C. Data Collection & Data Processing

Corrected Vehicle Model

1) Data Collection: Data is collected by driving the vehicle
Nominal Vehicle Model
on a track with a Pure Pursuit controller [27], using the
Next State
Data
implementation from [1]. Crucially, such a controller does not
+
require any tire or vehicle model knowledge apart from the
Neural Network
wheelbase length L, making it apt as a starting baseline. A
single collected data tuple for NN training is identified with
Dtrain = [vx , vy , ω, δ].
Figure 3: The corrected vehicle model structure combining
2) Data Processing: After collecting the data, prepro- a nominal vehicle model and a NN to predict the next
cessing is performed to prepare it for NN training. First, a state variables v
y,k+1 and ωk+1 . Where fmodel (xk , uk , Φp )
noncausal low-pass filter is applied to handle noise from represents the state transition function based on (4), with x
k
measurement errors and environmental factors, ensuring and u being the state and input vectors, respectively, and
k
smooth and reliable data without introducing phase delays. Φ are the Pacejka parameters.
p
Second, assuming symmetric vehicle dynamics, the dataset
is augmented by mirroring lateral velocity, yaw rate, and
2) Virtual Steady-State Data Generation: To identify
steering angle, while keeping longitudinal velocity unchanged.
This augmentation increases the data volume and eliminates Pacejka parameters, we first generate virtual steady-state
data by simulating the corrected vehicle model at a constant
the cornering bias inherent to racing tracks.
longitudinal speed. The chosen speed is the average longituD. Neural Network for Identification
dinal velocity of the training data, ensuring the NN performs
The NN is tasked with learning and correcting the model confidently due to its familiarity with this type of data. During
error to improve the nominal vehicle model. The targets of the simulation, the steering angle is gradually increased from
the NN are the prediction errors ek = [evy,k , eωk ] for the 0 to 0.4 radians linearly, based on the operational limits of the
subsequent step’s lateral velocity and yaw rate. These errors target platform, a 1:10 scaled vehicle. By incrementing the
are determined as described in (5).
steering angle in this controlled manner, we can observe and
The inputs for the NN are chosen to be [xk , uk ] = record the vehicle’s response under steady-state conditions.
[vx,k , vy,k , ωk , δk ] since the model error depends on these
The simulation initializes the states x0 = [vy,0 ω0 ] = [0 0].
variables in the determined vehicle model. In summary, the The prior next state predictions, x̂k+1 , from the nominal
NN models the prediction error of a nominal vehicle model model are corrected with the NN’s error prediction, ek , using
based on these inputs. This function learned by the NN is the current states and inputs as described in (7). This process
denoted as follows:
generates the entire steady-state data over 10 seconds with a
time step of 0.02 seconds.
ek = fN N (vx,k , vy,k , ωk , δk ),
(6)
3) Pacejka Model Parameters Identification: Since the
generated
data is in steady-state, we assume v̇y = 0 and
representing the prediction of the error ek given the inputs.
ω̇ = 0. This allows us to accurately compute the lateral forces
E. Parameter Identification with the Corrected Vehicle Model Fyr and Fyf using the states and inputs:
The NNs performance is constrained by the limited training
mlf
Fyr =
vx ω
data available, making globally accurate behavior challenging
lf + lr
and struggling with sparse, non-existent, or significantly
.
(8)
mlr vx ω
different inputs from the training data (out-of-distribution). To
Fyf =
lf + lr cos(δ)
address those limitations, we identify Pacejka parameters, as
The slip angles αf and αr are calculated using (3). We then
the Pacejka tire model accurately represents vehicle dynamics
across diverse conditions. By simulating the corrected vehicle fit the Pacejka model to the force vs. slip angle data (Fyf , αf )
model with a range of well-represented input variables, we and (Fyr , αr ) through least squares regression [4, 10].
ensure that the NN operates within in-distribution data, leading
F. Iterative Learning
to reliable predictions.
Even though the identified Pacejka parameters improve the
1) The Corrected Vehicle Model: The corrected vehicle
model,
a mismatch may still persist if the initial mismatch is
model leverages both the NN and the nominal vehicle
high.
To
address this, we iteratively refine the model by using
model, similarly to [5]. The nominal model provides a
the
identified
parameters as a new nominal model, learning its
baseline prediction, while the NN corrects residual errors.
residuals,
and
repeating the process until the model converges.
This structure is shown in Figure 3.
The
convergence
is determined empirically by observing that
The corrected next states [vy,k+1 , ωk+1 ] are calculated as
further
iterations
do
not yield significant improvements in the
follows:
identified
Pacejka
models.
This approach ensures that the NN
xk+1 = x̂k+1 + ek ,
(7)
continuously learns residual errors based on progressively
where x̂k+1 is the predicted next state from the nominal more accurate Pacejka parameters, improving the overall
vehicle model using (4), and ek is the residual error predicted vehicle model accuracy. The scheme for this iterative approach
by the NN using (6).
is demonstrated in Figure 4.

One significant advantage of this iterative approach is that
it removes the dependency on having an initially accurate
nominal model. Even if the initial model has a high mismatch,
the iterative process allows for continuous improvement of the
nominal model’s accuracy until it converges. By identifying
Pacejka parameters and re-initializing the NN, we prevent
overfitting and progressively refine the model’s accuracy.
Residual Error Modeling Using Neural Networks
Nominal Vehicle Model
NN Training
with
Residual
Error

Data

Corrected Vehicle Model

Pacejka Parameters Identification
Virtual Steady-State Data
Generation

Steady-State
System
Identification

Figure 4: Scheme of the iterative approach: Starting with
residual error modeling and corrected vehicle model formation,
followed by steady-state system identification using virtual
data from the corrected vehicle model. Identified parameters
are then used as a new nominal model for learning residual
errors, repeating iteratively until convergence.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present the metrics utilized for assessing
the accuracy and performance of the identified models and
then show the results in simulation and on the physical 1:10
scaled autonomous racing platform.
A. Model Architecture

B. Model Validation and Performance Assessment Metrics
1) One-Step Prediction Errors: At each time step in the
test set Dtest , generated from a different run on the same
track, the identified models generate predictions for the
subsequent states, x̂k+1 = f (xk , uk ). These predictions are
then compared with the observed subsequent states, xk+1 ,
using the RMSE to evaluate prediction accuracy.
2) Racing Performance: We will also evaluate the lap time
to complete a lap as well as the average and maximum lateral
deviation from the racing trajectory achieved by a model-based
lateral controller [4] utilizing the identified model parameters.
These metrics serve as a practical performance measure in a
real-world scenario, indicating how well the model supports
the controller in achieving high racing performance.
C. Simulation Results
1) Experimental Setup: The simulation experiments are
conducted in the F1TENTH simulator [1], which was adapted
to use the single-track vehicle model presented in Section III-A
with parameters similar to those of the real vehicle to minimize
the sim-to-real gap. The simulator also provides ground truth
data.
To benchmark our approach, we also employ the NLS
method for comparison, applying the same low-pass filtering
to the data for both approaches to ensure a fair comparison.
The objective function for NLS aims to find the best Pacejka
parameters Φp that minimize the sum of squared residuals
between the observed and predicted states over all time steps
and is formulated as follows:
min
Φp

N
X

2

2

2
αv2y (vy,k+1 − v̂y,k+1 ) + αω
(ωk+1 − ω̂k+1 ) .

k=1

(9)
The scaling parameters αvy , αω were both set to 1 throughout
this work. For both approaches, 30 seconds of driving data,
corresponding to 2 laps on the track, with a time step of
0.02 seconds is collected within the simulator by driving
the vehicle with a model-free Pure Pursuit [27] controller to
follow the predefined trajectory.
Given the simulator’s simplified vehicle model and the
availability of ground truth data, both methods are expected
to yield accurate models. To evaluate the robustness of
each method under noisy conditions, we introduce artificial
Gaussian noise to the data, simulating real-world measurement
noise. The procedure for adding noise is as follows:

The NN architecture used is a feed-forward Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP) with an input layer of 4 neurons, one
hidden layer of 8 neurons, and an output layer of 2 neurons,
comprising a total of 58 parameters. Due to our limited
dataset size, we chose a simple model to reduce the risk of
overfitting. Initial tests showed that adding layers or neurons
did not improve accuracy and instead led to overfitting,
capturing noise over useful patterns. This simpler structure
provided computational efficiency while effectively capturing
essential data patterns. Both the input and hidden layers
use the LeakyReLU activation function to introduce nondnoisy = d + N (0, davg · η),
(10)
linearity, while the output layer uses a linear activation
function to produce the final predictions. For training, we where d = [vx , vy , ω, δ] represents the state and input
use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4 , variables, davg are their respective average magnitudes to
determined through systematic testing of values ranging from maintain a consistent noise-to-signal ratio across different
10−2 to 10−6 . This learning rate provided stable convergence levels of the state and input variables. N (0, σ) denotes
behavior and minimized training time without sacrificing Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard deviation σ,
model performance. The loss function used is Mean Square scaled by the noise multiplier η, which is increased gradually
Error (MSE). We use a batch size equal to the entire dataset after each experiment from 0 to 1.4 with an increment of 0.2.
size, performing batch gradient descent for each training step.
2) Model Validation Testing: Figure 5 illustrates the RMSE
This approach reduces the impact of noisy data points and is of lateral velocity (vy ) and yaw rate (ω) predictions under
feasible given the limited size of our dataset.
varying levels of noise. The x-axis represents the noise

trajectory using a model-free Pure Pursuit [27] controller,
assuming no prior knowledge of tire parameters. This method
provided diverse and dynamic data, crucial for on-track
system identification. The choice of 30 seconds was based on
NN (ours)
NLS
0.06
preliminary tests, which showed it was sufficient for robust
parameter identification.
0.04
3) Model Validation Testing: Figure 6 shows the identified
Pacejka models for both front and rear tires using the three
0.02
approaches. The models identified with our approach align
0.00
well with the baseline steady-state method, while the NLS
0.08
fails to produce similar models. At higher lateral slip angles—
greater than 0.15 and 0.13 radians for the front and rear tires,
0.06
respectively—the models diverge due to insufficient data in
0.04
that region, as it lies outside the operational region. Therefore,
our region of interest is limited to slip angles below 0.15
0.02
and 0.13 radians for the front and rear tires, respectively.
0.00
Within
this region, both our approach and the steady-state
1.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Noise Standard Level Multiplier [η]
method show perfect alignment for the front tires, while slight
deviations for the rear tires are observed, likely due to noise
Figure 5: The RMSE of lateral velocity and yaw rate in the data.
predictions for the models identified using our approach and
Table I presents a comparison of the three methods using
the NLS on the test set under increasing levels of noise.
key metrics, including the RMSE for lateral velocity (vy )
Experiments were repeated 10 times.
and yaw rate (ω) on the test data, as well as lap time,
average lateral error, and maximum lateral error. All runs
As our initial tests showed that the identified Pacejka models were performed with a Model- and Acceleration-based Pursuit
typically converge within six iterations across all noise levels, (MAP) controller [1, 4], utilizing the tire parameters identified
we run our approach for six iterations. For lateral velocity by each method. Despite being considered the gold standard,
(vy ), our approach consistently outperforms the NLS method the steady-state method shows the worst RMSE performance
across all noise levels (η). In terms of yaw rate (ω), the for ω on a noisy real-world dataset, as shown in Table I.
performance of our approach is comparable to that of the Similarly, although the NLS achieves the lowest RMSE for ω,
NLS method. When averaging the performance across both the resulting Pacejka parameters underestimate tire forces, as
vy and ω, the proposed method achieves an RMSE that is 3.3 shown in Figure 6, leading to undrivable (i.e., N.C.) behavior
times lower for the one-step prediction compared to the NLS in closed-loop tests.
method, highlighting its robustness and accuracy in handling
noisy conditions.
ωRMSE [rad/s]

vy, RMSE [m/s]

standard deviation multiplier (η), which scales the standard
deviation of the Gaussian noise added to the data.

Front Tires

Front Tires

D. Physical F1TENTH Results
Fyf [N]

10

10

5

5

Ours
SS
NLS

Iterations
Nominal Model

0

0

Rear Tires

Rear Tires

10

Fyr [N]

1) Experimental Setup: For the real-world experiments,
we used an F1TENTH vehicle as detailed in [1]. This
setup includes an onboard Intel NUC computer running all
software algorithms within the ROS framework, enabling
indoor localization and state estimation, as in [1].
In practice, due to the absence of a ground truth model,
we use the widely adopted steady-state system identification
[10], as a baseline. This method is expected to yield a
highly accurate model because the Pacejka parameters are
identified under controlled, simplified steady-state conditions.
Additionally, the NLS method, with the objective function (9),
is used as another on-track system identification benchmark
to compare with the proposed approach.
2) Data Collection: For steady-state identification, three
experiments were conducted at constant velocities (2-3 m s−1 )
and ramp steering angles (0.2–0.4 radians), covering a range
of slip angles in a controlled 6.5m x 6.5m space.
For both the NLS and our approach, 30 seconds of driving
data—equivalent to approximately 3 laps—was collected on
the same surface used for steady-state experiments. During
these trials, the vehicle was driven to follow a predefined

10

5

5

Ours
SS
NLS

Iterations
Nominal Model

0
0.00

0.05

0.10

α [rad]

0.15

0.20

0
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

α [rad]

Figure 6: The left plots illustrate the evolution of the resultant
Pacejka models using our method over six iterations, starting
from the nominal model (bronze) and transitioning through
shades of blue (light to dark). The right plots show the
identified Pacejka models using three methods: Ours, SteadyState (SS), and NLS.

with a nominal Pacejka tire model. The approach eliminates
the need for large, open spaces such as required by traditional
vy,RM SE [m/s]
0.0233
0.0239
0.0289
steady-state methods by utilizing on-track data, simplifying
0.106
0.108
0.0655
ωRM SE [rad/s]
the process, and achieving up to 3.3 times lower RMSE
tµ
8.10
8.16
N.C.
lap [s]
under noise compared to standard NLS methods. It uses three
0.082
0.092
N.C.
|dµ | [m]
times less data than steady-state methods, learning the model
|dmax | [m]
0.27
0.3
N.C.
in 33 seconds, and adapts in 1 second for environmental
Table I: The RMSE values for lateral velocity vy and yaw rate changes, enabling real-time updates. The identified Pacejka
ω, along with lap times, average, and maximum deviation from models closely align with steady-state methods within critical
the trajectory for different methods: our approach, the steady- slip angles, demonstrating its practicality, robustness, and
state system identification method, and the NLS approach. efficiency for advancing autonomous racing performance.
N.C.: Not completed a lap without track violations
Different lines of future work are possible. One direction
is to improve the accuracy of the nominal model by precisely
refining the tire model and then combining it with more
The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed complex ML models, such as those presented in [24, 25].
on-track system identification method accurately identifies Another direction involves exploring metrics beyond one-step
tire parameters, producing Pacejka models similar to those prediction RMSE that could better assess the performance
obtained from traditional steady-state methods, particularly of the identified Pacejka models and help define a stopping
within the critical slip angle range. Our approach offers criterion, as the current metric has proven to be not entirely
significant operational simplicity compared to steady-state indicative of Pacejka parameters identification performance.
system identification and greater robustness compared to Furthermore, given its small computational footprint, the full
the classical NLS method while achieving the best racing NN corrected vehicle model could be used in the context of
performance among the benchmark methods.
a simulator, similarly to [6], or in a sampling-based Model
Most notably, our approach requires only six iterations, Predictive Control (MPC) method as in [24]. Finally, further
with each iteration taking approximately 0.5 seconds, totaling extensions could also consider applying the same algorithm
just 3 seconds to learn the complete vehicle model, even to other robotic platforms, where system identification would
without accurate prior knowledge. This confirms the accuracy, require inconvenient infrastructure.
efficiency, and practicality of our method for real-world
autonomous racing applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Metrics

E. Dynamic Adaptation

Ours

Steady-State

NLS

The authors would like to thank all team members of the
This experiment evaluates our method’s ability to adapt ForzaETH racing team. In particular Niklas Bastuck for the
from an initial hard tire model to a soft tire model under real- photography of the live car in Figure 1.
world conditions, such as tire softening due to temperature
R EFERENCES
changes. A controller based on the hard tire model is employed
while the vehicle operates with soft tires. Since only a slight
[1] N. Baumann, E. Ghignone, J. Kühne, N. Bastuck,
model mismatch is assumed, our method is executed only for
J. Becker, N. Imholz, T. Kränzlin, T. Y. Lim, M. Lötscher,
two iterations, completing in a total of 1 second. As shown in
L. Schwarzenbach et al., “Forzaeth race stack-scaled
Table II, adapting to the soft tire model achieves a lap time
autonomous head-to-head racing on fully commercial offof 8.5 seconds and an average lateral error of 0.11 meters,
the-shelf hardware,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11784,
outperforming the initial hard tire model by 0.25 seconds and
2024.
reducing the lateral error by 0.05 meters.
[2] J. Betz, H. Zheng, A. Liniger, U. Rosolia, P. Karle,
M. Behl, V. Krovi, and R. Mangharam, “Autonomous
Metrics
Hard Tire Model
Adapted Soft Tire Model
vehicles
on the edge: A survey on autonomous vehicle
tµ
8.75
8.5
lap [s]
racing,”
IEEE
Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation
|dµ | [m]
0.16
0.11
Systems, vol. 3, pp. 458–488, 2022.
[3] H. B. Pacejka and E. Bakker, “The magic formula tyre
Table II: Performance comparison showing adaptation from an
model,” Vehicle system dynamics, vol. 21, no. S1, pp.
initial hard tire model to a soft tire model, reflecting real-time
1–18,
1992.
responsiveness to changes in tire conditions.
[4] J. Becker, N. Imholz, L. Schwarzenbach, E. Ghignone,
N. Baumann, and M. Magno, “Model-and accelerationThese results demonstrate our method’s ability to adapt in
based pursuit controller for high-performance aureal-time within just 1 second, utilizing 30 seconds of driving
tonomous racing,” in 2023 IEEE International Conferdata, making it suitable for dynamic racing conditions that
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023,
require rapid adjustments.
pp. 5276–5283.
V. CONCLUSIONS
[5] H. Xue, E. L. Zhu, J. M. Dolan, and F. Borrelli,
This paper presents a learning-based on-track system
“Learning model predictive control with error dynamidentification method for autonomous racing, integrating a NN
ics regression for autonomous racing,” in 2024 IEEE

International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2024, pp. 13 250–13 256.
[6] J. Chrosniak, J. Ning, and M. Behl, “Deep dynamics:
Vehicle dynamics modeling with a physics-constrained
neural network for autonomous racing,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5292–5297,
2024.
[7] J. Kabzan, M. I. Valls, V. J. F. Reijgwart, H. F. C.
Hendrikx, C. Ehmke, M. Prajapat, A. Bühler, N. Gosala, M. Gupta, R. Sivanesan, A. Dhall, E. Chisari,
N. Karnchanachari, S. Brits, M. Dangel, I. Sa, R. Dubé,
A. Gawel, M. Pfeiffer, A. Liniger, J. Lygeros, and
R. Siegwart, “AMZ driverless: The full autonomous
racing system,” J. field robot., no. rob.21977, Aug. 2020.
[8] A. Wischnewski, M. Geisslinger, J. Betz, T. Betz,
F. Fent, A. Heilmeier, L. Hermansdorfer, T. Herrmann,
S. Huch, P. Karle, F. Nobis, L. Ögretmen, M. Rowold,
F. Sauerbeck, T. Stahl, R. Trauth, M. Lienkamp,
and B. Lohmann, “Indy autonomous challenge –
autonomous race cars at the handling limits,” 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03807
[9] A. Liniger, A. Domahidi, and M. Morari, “Optimizationbased autonomous racing of 1:43 scale rc cars,”
Optimal Control Applications and Methods, vol. 36,
no. 5, p. 628–647, Jul 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/oca.2123
[10] C. Voser, R. Y. Hindiyeh, and J. C. Gerdes, “Analysis
and control of high sideslip manoeuvres,” Vehicle System
Dynamics, vol. 48, no. sup1, pp. 317–336, 2010. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/00423111003746140
[11] A. Raji, A. Liniger, A. Giove, A. Toschi, N. Musiu,
D. Morra, M. Verucchi, D. Caporale, and M. Bertogna,
“Motion planning and control for multi vehicle autonomous racing at high speeds,” in 2022 IEEE 25th
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), 2022, pp. 2775–2782.
[12] H. Seong, C. Chung, and D. H. Shim, “Model parameter
identification via a hyperparameter optimization scheme
for autonomous racing systems,” IEEE Control Systems
Letters, vol. 7, pp. 1652–1657, 2023.
[13] R. Rajamani, Vehicle Dynamics and Control, 01 2006.
[14] M. Brunner, U. Rosolia, J. Gonzales, and F. Borrelli,
“Repetitive learning model predictive control: An autonomous racing example,” in 2017 IEEE 56th Annual
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 2017, pp.
2545–2550.
[15] S. Bodmer, L. Vogel, S. Muntwiler, A. Hansson,
T. Bodewig, J. Wahlen, M. N. Zeilinger, and A. Carron,
“Optimization-based system identification and moving
horizon estimation using low-cost sensors for a miniature
car-like robot,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08362, 2024.
[16] J. Kabzan, L. Hewing, A. Liniger, and M. N. Zeilinger,
“Learning-based model predictive control for autonomous
racing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 3363–3370, 2019.
[17] B. A. H. Vicente, S. S. James, and S. R. Anderson,
“Linear system identification versus physical modeling
of lateral–longitudinal vehicle dynamics,” IEEE Trans-

actions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 1380–1387, 2021.
[18] A. Jain, M. O’Kelly, P. Chaudhari, and M. Morari,
“Bayesrace: Learning to race autonomously using
prior experience,” in Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, J. Kober, F. Ramos,
and C. Tomlin, Eds., vol. 155. PMLR, 16–18
Nov 2021, pp. 1918–1929. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v155/jain21b.html
[19] T. Nagy, A. Amine, T. X. Nghiem, U. Rosolia, Z. Zang,
and R. Mangharam, “Ensemble gaussian processes
for adaptive autonomous driving on multi-friction
surfaces,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 56, no. 2, pp.
494–500, 2023, 22nd IFAC World Congress. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2405896323020244
[20] L. Hewing, A. Liniger, and M. N. Zeilinger, “Cautious
NMPC with gaussian process dynamics for miniature
race cars,” CoRR, vol. abs/1711.06586, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06586
[21] D. Kalaria, Q. Lin, and J. M. Dolan, “Adaptive
planning and control with time-varying tire models for
autonomous racing using extreme learning machine,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.
08235
[22] L. Hermansdorfer, R. Trauth, J. Betz, and M. Lienkamp,
“End-to-end neural network for vehicle dynamics modeling,” in 2020 6th IEEE Congress on Information Science
and Technology (CiSt), 2020, pp. 407–412.
[23] Y. Tsuchiya, T. Balch, P. Drews, and G. Rosman,
“Online adaptation of learned vehicle dynamics model
with meta-learning approach,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14950
[24] D. Kalaria, H. Xue, W. Xiao, T. Tao, G. Shi, and J. M.
Dolan, “Agile mobility with rapid online adaptation
via meta-learning and uncertainty-aware mppi,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06565
[25] W. Xiao, H. Xue, T. Tao, D. Kalaria, J. M. Dolan,
and G. Shi, “Anycar to anywhere: Learning universal
dynamics model for agile and adaptive mobility,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.15783
[26] T. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Wang, B. Li, Y. Tian, and F.-Y.
Wang, “A survey of vehicle dynamics modeling methods
for autonomous racing: Theoretical models, physical/virtual platforms, and perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 4312–4334, 2024.
[27] J. M. Snider, “Automatic steering methods for
autonomous automobile path tracking,” 2009.
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:17512121

